# The STM32 Code Structure

## A. General info

A project created with STM32Cube MX is composed of the next file types:
- ProjectName.ioc . This file contains the options for device (MCU/Development Board) settings (pin mapping/custom labeling, clock settings for different blocks), settings for ADC, Timers, DMA etc). When opened, this file triggers a graphicall windows where user can update device settings. After saving those settings, they are automatically included/updated into proper regions of the ProjectName/Core/src/main.c file
- a collection of  "header ".h" files" that contains lists of variable and functions of different software modules (files containing code for a specific functionality). This folder is ProjectName/Core/Inc.
- a collection of  "source ".c" files" that contains lists of variable and functions of different software modules, together with their values and associated code. This folder is ProjectName/Core.Src.

A header file must always be paired with a source file having the same name.
The diference between them is that:
- a header file contains only a list of variables and functions. It has the same purpose as a Table of Contents.
- a source file contains also the values of the variables and the code of the functions mentioned in the header file with the same name. 
It has the same purpose as a the content of a book chapter.
To link the content of the source file with the content of the header file, the header file must be included into the source file with the line `#include <headerFileName.h>`

> ℹ️ **Important**: To avoid defining a header file multiple types by mistake (and get compilation errors), a good practice is to always use the so called "header guards" in header files.
This means inside a header file you need to put your custom code as in the example bellow:

Examples of a .h file that uses header guards:
```c
/* === Your_Header_Name.h === */
#ifndef INC_YOUR_HEADER_NAME_H_
#define INC_YOUR_HEADER_NAME_H_
//Put here your custom code
#endif /* INC_YOUR_HEADER_NAME_H_ */
```

In STM32CubeMX the most fundamental software module is the ProjectName/Core.Src/main.c file.
This file contains both:
- the device configuration settings. As mentioned before, these type of settings (pin mapping, peripheral and clock settings etc.) are done graphically and included/updated into proper regions of the ProjectName/Core/src/main.c file.
- the user code, which must be written ONLY inside sections marked with comments like `/* USER CODE BEGIN x */` and `/* USER CODE END x */`. These regions are the only ones that are 100% preserved when the device configuration settings are updated.


## B. The STM32 equivalent of setup() and loop() functions found in Arduine IDE

| Arduino   | STM32 (CubeMX/HAL)                                                                               | Notes                         |
| --------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | ----------------------------- |
| `setup()` | Code between `/* USER CODE BEGIN 2 */` and `/* USER CODE END 2 */` comments inside `main.c` file | Initialization code goes here |
| `loop()`  | Code between `/* USER CODE BEGIN 3 */` and `/* USER CODE END 2 */` comments inside `main.c` file | Put your repetitive code here |

Example in `main.c`:
```c
int main(void)
{  /* USER CODE BEGIN 2 */     // ← Initialization code here (like Arduino's setup())
   /* USER CODE END 2 */

  while (1)
  {
    /* USER CODE BEGIN 3 */   // ← Repeating code here (like Arduino's loop())
    /* USER CODE END 3 */
  }
}
```
> ℹ️ **Important**: Write your own code ONLY inside sections marked with comments like `/* USER CODE BEGIN x */` and `/* USER CODE END x */`.
These regions are preserved when you regenerate code with STM32CubeMX.
Anything outside these blocks may be deleted or overwritten.




## C. Global Variables - Declaration, definition and inclusion in the main source code

The most basic building block of a software is the variable.
While the local variables can be simply defined directly into the software module where they are used (as we'll see in the next chapter), the global variables are recomented to be defined into a separate software module.

### Global variables should be declared in a `globals.h` file following these steps:
- navigate to "Project Explorer / YourProject / Core / Inc";
- right-click on "Inc" folder;
- choose "New / Header file";
- in the "New Header File" dialog window write "globals.h" in the "Header file:" field and choose "Default C header template" in "Template" field. Click "Finish".
- `globals.h` file opens automatically with some predefined code in it. Place your global variables just before the `endif /* GLOBALS_H_ */` line.
- include also the stdbool.h and stdint.h libraries (to make the code able to use boolean and int type variables).

> Examples of supported variables: `int`, `char`, `float`, `bool`, `uint8_t`, `int16_t`

Example of how the content of `globals.h` content should look like:
```c
/* === globals.h === */
#ifndef GLOBALS_H_
#define GLOBALS_H_
#include <stdbool.h>
#include <stdint.h>

//START of declaring your variables
extern int globalVariableName1;  // Declaration of a 1st variable
extern int globalVariableName2;  // Declaration of a 2nd variable
extern int globalVariableName3;  // Declaration of a 3rd variable
//END of declaring your variables

#endif /* GLOBALS_H_ */
```
### The global variables you declared in `globals.h` must be also defined (assigned default values) into a `globals.c` file following these steps:
- navigate to "Project Explorer / YourProject / Core / Src";
- right-click on "Src" folder;
- choose "New / Source file";
- in the "New Source File" dialog window write "globals.c" in the "Source file:" field and choose "Default C header template" in "Template" field. Click "Finish".
- `globals.c` file opens automatically. Add the '#include "global_variables.h"' line and set the type and the default value of each of your global variables.

Example of how the content of `globals.c` content should look like:
```c
/* === globals.c === */
#include "global_variables.h"

//START of declaring your variables
int globalVariableName1 = 0;  // Definition of the 1st variable
int globalVariableName2 = 0;  // Definition of the 2nd variable
int globalVariableName3 = 0;  // Definition of the 3rd variable
//START of declaring your variables
```


### To make your global variables available to the main code, the `globals.h` file must be included into `main.c` file following these steps:
- navigate to "Project Explorer / YourProject / Core / Src" and open the `main.c` file;
- search for the `'Private includes'` section and include your `globals.h` file as shown in the example below.
```c
/* === main.c === */

/* Private includes ----------------------------------------------------------*/
/* USER CODE BEGIN Includes */
#include "globals.h"
/* USER CODE END Includes */
```


## D. Creating a software module and its local variables
From a pure technical point of view it's perfectly fine to have all the user code place in a single file (main.c).
However, to make the use code more manageable it is more practical to organize it into multiple files (modules), each of them containing functions and local variables aimed for a single main functionality (e.g. "LCD_diplay_I2C" module, "Import_Export_NVRAM" module, "Background_Task_Scheduler" module. etc).

### Create the header file of the software module:
- navigate to "Project Explorer / YourProject / Core / Inc";
- right-click on "Inc" folder;
- choose "New / Header file";
- in the "New Header File" dialog fill the desire name for your file + ".h" suffix in the "Header file:" field and choose "Default C header template" in "Template" field. Click "Finish".
- your newly created header file opens automatically. If the file contains header guards or you add them manually, make sure you place your code just before the `endif` line.
- include also the stdbool.h and stdint.h libraries (to make the code able to use boolean and int type variables).

> Examples of supported variables: `int`, `char`, `float`, `bool`, `uint8_t`, `int16_t`

Example of how the content of `globals.h` content should look like:
```c
/* === globals.h === */
#ifndef GLOBALS_H_
#define GLOBALS_H_
#include <stdbool.h>
#include <stdint.h>

//START of declaring your variables
extern int globalVariableName1;  // Declaration of a 1st variable
extern int globalVariableName2;  // Declaration of a 2nd variable
extern int globalVariableName3;  // Declaration of a 3rd variable
//END of declaring your variables

#endif /* GLOBALS_H_ */
```
### Create the source file of the software module:
- navigate to "Project Explorer / YourProject / Core / Src";
- right-click on "Src" folder;
- choose "New / Source file";
- in the "New Source File" dialog window write "globals.c" in the "Source file:" field and choose "Default C header template" in "Template" field. Click "Finish".
- `globals.c` file opens automatically. Add the '#include "global_variables.h"' line and set the type and the default value of each of your global variables.

Example of how the content of `globals.c` content should look like:
```c
/* === globals.c === */
#include "global_variables.h"

//START of declaring your variables
int globalVariableName1 = 0;  // Definition of the 1st variable
int globalVariableName2 = 0;  // Definition of the 2nd variable
int globalVariableName3 = 0;  // Definition of the 3rd variable
//START of declaring your variables
```




